---
title: "Adapting HSMs for Post-Quantum Cryptography"
abbrev: "Adapting HSMs for PQC"
category: info

docname: draft-reddy-pquip-pqc-hsm-latest
submissiontype: IETF
number:
date:
consensus: true
v: 3
area: "Security"
workgroup: "PQUIP"
keyword:
 - PQC
 - HSM


venue:
  group: "pquip"
  type: "Working Group"
  mail: "pqc@ietf.org"
  arch: "https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/browse/pqc/"


stand_alone: yes
pi: [toc, sortrefs, symrefs, strict, comments, docmapping]

author:
 -
    fullname: Tirumaleswar Reddy
    organization: Nokia
    city: Bangalore
    region: Karnataka
    country: India
    email: "kondtir@gmail.com"
 -
    fullname: Dan Wing
    organization: Cloud Software Group Holdings, Inc.
    abbrev: Cloud Software Group
    country: United States of America
    email: danwing@gmail.com
 -
    fullname: Ben Salter
    organization: UK National Cyber Security Centre
    email: ben.s3@ncsc.gov.uk

normative:

informative:
  RFC8554:
  RFC8391:
  ML-KEM:
     title: "FIPS-203: Module-Lattice-based Key-Encapsulation Mechanism Standard"
     target: https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/FIPS/NIST.FIPS.203.pdf
     date: false
  ML-DSA:
     title: "FIPS-204: Module-Lattice-Based Digital Signature Standard"
     target: https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/FIPS/NIST.FIPS.204.pdf
     date: false
  REC-SHS:
     title: "Recommendation for Stateful Hash-Based Signature Scheme"
     target: https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/SpecialPublications/NIST.SP.800-208.pdf
     date: false
  BIND:
    title: Unbindable Kemmy Schmid
    target: https://eprint.iacr.org/2024/523.pdf
  SLH-DSA:
     title: "FIPS-205: Stateless Hash-Based Digital Signature Standard"
     target: https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/FIPS/NIST.FIPS.205.pdf
     date: false
  REC-KEM:
    title: Recommendations for Key-Encapsulation Mechanisms
    target: https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/SpecialPublications/NIST.SP.800-227.ipd.pdf

--- abstract


Hardware Security Modules (HSMs) play a critical role in securing
cryptographic operations, including the adoption of Post-Quantum
Cryptography (PQC). This document examines the use of seed-based key
generation in HSMs, which reduces storage requirements but increases
computational overhead for key derivation. It explores trade-offs
between storage efficiency and performance, addressing challenges in
ephemeral key handling and optimization strategies for PQC signature
algorithms. It also discusses PQC impacts to HSM firmware updates and
backup.

--- middle

# Introduction

The transition to post-quantum cryptography (PQC) introduces new
challenges for cryptographic key management, particularly within
constrained Hardware Security Modules (HSMs). Unlike high-performance,
rack-mounted HSMs, constrained HSMs operate with limited memory,
storage, and computational resources, making the adoption of PQC
algorithms more challenging. The increased key sizes and computational
demands of PQC require careful consideration to ensure secure and
efficient key management within these constrained environments.

This document provides industry guidance and best practices for
integrating PQC algorithms into constrained HSMs. It explores key
storage strategies, ephemeral key management, and performance
optimizations specific to resource-limited environments. One approach
to mitigating storage constraints is seed-based key generation, where
only a small seed is stored instead of the full private key, as
supported by PQC schemes like ML-DSA and SLH-DSA. However, this
technique increases computational overhead due to the need to derive
full private keys on demand. The document also discusses
considerations for ephemeral key generation in protocols like TLS and
IPsec, along with techniques to optimize PQC signature operations to
enhance performance within constrained HSMs.

This document focuses on the use of PQC algorithms in HSMs,
specifically the three algorithms finalized by NIST: ML-DSA, ML-KEM,
and SLH-DSA. While other PQC algorithms, such as stateful hash-based
signatures, also provide post-quantum security, they are not covered
in this version of the document. Future revisions may expand the scope
to include additional PQC algorithms.

# Key Management in HSMs for PQC

One mitigation of storage limitations is to store only the seed rather
than the full expanded private key, as the seed is far smaller and can
derive the expanded private key as necessary.

## Seed Management {#Seed}

The seed generated during the PQC key generation function is highly
sensitive, as it will be used to compute the private key or
decapsulation key. Consequently, seeds must be treated with the same
level of security as private keys.

To comply with {{ML-KEM}}, {{ML-DSA}}, {{SLH-DSA}} and {{REC-KEM}}
guidelines:

### Seed Storage

Seeds must be securely stored within a cryptographic module, such as a
Hardware Security Module (HSM), to ensure protection against
unauthorized access. Since the seed can be used to compute the private
key, it must be safeguarded with the same level of protection as the
private key itself. For example, according to {{ML-DSA}} Section
3.6.3, the seed `Î¾` generated during `ML-DSA.KeyGen` can be stored for
later expansion using `ML-DSA.KeyGen_internal`.

The choice between storing a seed or an expanded private key involves
trade-offs between storage efficiency and performance. Some
constrained HSMs may store only the seed and derive the expanded
private key on demand, whereas others may prefer storing the full
expanded key to reduce computational overhead during key usage.

While vulnerabilities like the "Unbindable Kemmy Schmidt" attack
{{BIND}} demonstrate the risks of manipulating expanded private keys
in certain non-HSM environments, these attacks generally assume an
adversary has some level of control over the expanded key
format. However, in a HSM environment, where private keys are
typically protected from such manipulation, the primary motivation for
storing the seed rather than the expanded key is not directly tied to
mitigating "Kemmy" attacks.

The ML-DSA and ML-KEM private key formats, as specified in
{{?I-D.ietf-lamps-dilithium-certificates}} and
{{?I-D.ietf-lamps-kyber-certificates}}, represent the private key
using a seed from which the expanded private key is derived. While
these formats rely on the seed for key generation, an HSM may choose
to store the expanded private key to avoid the additional computation
required for running KeyGen. HSM implementations must also consider
compatibility with existing standards such as PKCS#11.

This choice between storing the seed or the expanded private key has
direct implications on performance, as key derivation incurs
additional computation. The impact of this overhead varies depending
on the algorithm. For instance, ML-DSA key generation, which primarily
involves polynomial operations using the Number Theoretic Transform
(NTT) and hashing, is computationally efficient. In contrast, SLH-DSA
key generation requires constructing a Merkle tree and multiple calls
to Winternitz One-Time Signature (WOTS+) key generation, making it
significantly slower due to the recursive hash computations
involved. HSM designers must carefully balance storage efficiency and
computational overhead based on system requirements and operational
constraints. While HSMs employ various key storage strategies, the
decision to store full private keys or only seeds depends on design
goals, performance considerations, and standards compliance.

A key challenge arises when importing an existing private key into a
system designed to store only seeds. When a user attempts to import an
already expanded private key, there is a mismatch between the key
format used internally (seed-based) and the expanded private key. This
issue arises because the internal format is designed for efficient key
storage by deriving the private key from the seed, while the expanded
private key is already fully computed. As NIST has not defined a
single private key format for PQC algorithms, this creates a potential
gap in interoperability.

If the seed is not securely stored at the time of key generation, it
is permanently lost because the process of deriving an expanded key
from the seed relies on a one-way cryptographic function. This one-way
function is designed to ensure that the expanded private key can be
deterministically derived from the seed, but the reverse operation,
deriving the original seed from the expanded key is computationally
infeasible.

### Efficient Key Derivation

When storing only the seed in an HSM, it is crucial that the HSM is
capable of deriving the private key efficiently whenever
required. However, it is important to note that constantly re-deriving
the private key for every cryptographic operation may introduce
significant performance overhead. In scenarios where performance is a
critical consideration, it may be more efficient to store the expanded
private key directly instead of only the seed.

The key derivation process, such as ML-KEM.KeyGen_internal for ML-KEM
or similar functions for other PQC algorithms, must still be
implemented in a way that can securely operate within the resource
constraints of the HSM. If using the seed-only model, the derived
private key should only be temporarily held in memory during the
cryptographic operation and discarded immediately after use. However,
storing the expanded private key may be a more practical solution in
some scenarios and could be considered for optimization.

### Secure Exporting of Seeds

Given the potential for hardware failures or the end-of-life of HSM
devices, it is essential to plan for backup and recovery of the
cryptographic seeds. HSMs should support secure seed backup
mechanisms, ideally leveraging encrypted storage and ensuring that the
backup data is protected from unauthorized access. In a disaster
recovery scenario, the seed should be recoverable to enable the
re-derivation of the private key, provided the proper security
measures are in place to prevent unauthorized extraction.  For secure
exporting of seeds, PQC encryption algorithms, such as ML-KEM, should
be used to encrypt the seed before export. This ensures that the seed
remains protected even if the export process is vulnerable to quantum
attacks. The process for secure export should include:

- Encrypting the seed using a post-quantum encryption algorithm, such as ML-KEM, rather than relying on traditional encryption algorithms.

- Ensuring the exported seed is accessible only to authorized entities.

- Enforcing strict access controls and secure transport mechanisms to prevent unauthorized access during transfer.

Wherever possible, seed generation, storage, and usage should remain
entirely within the cryptographic module. This minimizes the risk of
exposure and ensures compliance with established security guidelines.

# Ephemeral Key Management

In protocols like TLS and IPsec, ephemeral keys are used for key
exchange. Given the increased size of PQC key material, ephemeral key
management will have to be optimized for both security and
performance.

For PQC KEMs, ephemeral key-pairs must be generated from an ephemeral
seed, which needs to be securely stored temporarily and erased after
use. This approach ensures that ephemeral key generation is
deterministic and minimizes storage overhead in HSMs, as only the seed
(not the full private key) needs to be stored. The ephemeral seed must
be deleted immediately after the key pair is generated to prevent
potential leakage or misuse.

Furthermore, once the shared secret is derived, the private key must
also be deleted. Since the private key resides in the HSM, removing it
optimizes memory usage, reducing the footprint of PQC key material in
constrained HSMs.

Additionally, ephemeral keys should not be reused across different
algorithm suites and sessions. Each ephemeral key-pair must be
uniquely associated with a specific key exchange instance to prevent
cryptographic vulnerabilities, such as cross-protocol attacks or
unintended key reuse.

HSMs implementing PQC ephemeral key management will have to:

* Generate ephemeral key-pairs on-demand from an ephemeral seed stored temporarily within the cryptographic module.

* Enforce immediate seed erasure after the key-pair is generated and the cryptographic operation is completed.

* Delete the private key after the shared secret is derived.

* Prevent key reuse across different algorithm suites or sessions.

# Optimizing Performance in Hardware Implementations of PQC Signature Algorithms

When implementing PQC signature algorithms in hardware devices, such
as Hardware Security Modules (HSMs), performance optimization becomes
a critical consideration. Transmitting the entire message to the HSM
for signing can lead to significant overhead, especially for large
payloads. To address this, implementers can leverage techniques that
reduce the data transmitted to the HSM, thereby improving efficiency
and scalability.

One effective approach involves sending only a message digest to the
HSM for signing. By signing the digest of the content rather than the
entire content, the communication between the application and the HSM
is minimized, enabling better performance. This method is applicable
for any PQC signature algorithm, whether it is ML-DSA, SLH-DSA, or any
future signature scheme. For such algorithms, a mechanism is often
provided to pre-hash or process the message in a way that avoids
sending the entire raw message for signing. In particular, algorithms
like SLH-DSA present challenges due to their construction, which
requires multiple passes over the message digest during the signing
process. The signer does not retain the entire message or its full
digest in memory at once. Instead, different parts of the message
digest are processed sequentially during the signing procedure. This
differs from traditional algorithms like RSA or ECDSA, which allow for
more efficient processing of the message, without requiring multiple
passes or intermediate processing of the digest.

A key consideration when deploying ML-DSA in HSMs is the amount of RAM
available. ML-DSA, unlike traditional signature schemes such as RSA or
ECDSA, requires significant memory during signing due to multiple
Number Theoretic Transform (NTT) operations, matrix expansions, and
rejection sampling loops. These steps involve storing large polynomial
vectors and intermediate values, making ML-DSA more
memory-intensive. If an HSM has sufficient RAM, this may not be an
issue. However, in constrained environments with limited RAM,
implementing ML-DSA can be challenging. The signer must store and
process multiple transformed values, leading to increased
computational overhead if the HSM lacks the necessary RAM to manage
these operations efficiently.

To address the memory consumption challenge, algorithms like ML-DSA
offer a form of pre-hash using the mu (message representative) value
described in Section 6.2 of {{ML-DSA}}. The mu value provides an
abstraction for pre-hashing by allowing the hash or message
representative to be computed outside the HSM. This feature offers
additional flexibility by enabling the use of different cryptographic
modules for the pre-hashing step, reducing RAM consumption within the
HSM. The pre-computed mu value is then supplied to the HSM,
eliminating the need to transmit the entire message for
signing. {{?I-D.ietf-lamps-dilithium-certificates}} discusses
leveraging ExternalMu-ML-DSA, where the pre-hashing step
(ExternalMu-ML-DSA.Prehash) is performed in a software cryptographic
module, and only the pre-hashed message (mu) is sent to the HSM for
signing (ExternalMu-ML-DSA.Sign).  By implementing
ExternalMu-ML-DSA.Prehash in software and ExternalMu-ML-DSA.Sign in an
HSM, the cryptographic workload is efficiently distributed, making it
practical for high-volume signing operations even in
memory-constrained HSM environments.

# Additional Considerations for HSM Use in PQC

Key Rotation and Renewal: Applications are responsible for managing
key lifecycles, including periodic key rotation and renewal, for
compliance and cryptographic agility. While an HSM may provide
mechanisms to facilitate secure key rotation, such as generating new
key pairs, securely storing new seeds, and securely deleting outdated
keys, this functionality is not necessarily specific to PQC. However,
the security of PQC schemes is subject to ongoing research and
potential cryptanalytic advances. Future developments in quantum
algorithms, improved attacks on lattice-based cryptography, or
side-channel vulnerabilities may necessitate adjustments to key sizes,
algorithm choices and key rotation policies. HSMs should be designed
to support flexible key management, including the ability to update
algorithms and parameters as new security recommendations emerge.

# Post-quantum Firmware Upgrades for HSMs

HSMs deployed in the field require periodic firmware upgrades to patch
security vulnerabilities, introduce new cryptographic algorithms, and
improve overall functionality. However, the firmware upgrade process
itself can become a critical attack vector if not designed to be
post-quantum. If an adversary compromises the update mechanism, they
could introduce malicious firmware, undermining all other security
properties of the HSM. Therefore, ensuring a post-quantum firmware
upgrade process is critical for the security of deployed HSMs.

CRQCs pose an additional risk by breaking traditional digital
signatures (e.g., RSA, ECDSA) used to authenticate firmware
updates. If firmware verification relies on traditional signature
algorithms, attackers could generate forged signatures in the future
and distribute malicious updates.

## Post-quantum Firmware Authentication

To ensure the integrity and authenticity of firmware updates, HSM
vendors will have to adopt PQC digital signature schemes for code
signing. Recommended post-quantum algorithms include:

SLH-DSA (Stateless Hash-Based Digital Signature Algorithm): SLH-DSA
does not introduce any new hardness assumptions beyond those inherent
to its underlying hash functions. It builds upon established
foundations in cryptography, making it a reliable and robust digital
signature scheme for a post-quantum world. While attacks on
lattice-based schemes like ML-DSA can compromise their security,
SLH-DSA will remain unaffected by these attacks due to its distinct
mathematical foundations. This ensures the ongoing security of systems
and protocols that use SLH-DSA for digital signatures. Given that the
first vulnerabilities in PQC algorithms are more likely to arise from
implementation flaws rather than fundamental mathematical weaknesses,
SLH-DSA is still susceptible to attacks if not properly implemented..

HSS-LMS (Hierarchical Signature System - Leighton-Micali Signature): A
hash-based signature scheme, providing long-term security and
efficient key management for firmware authentication (see
{{REC-SHS}}).

XMSS (eXtended Merkle Signature Scheme): Another stateful hash-based
signature scheme similar to HSS-LMS {{RFC8391}}. XMSS signatures are
slightly shorter than HSS-LMS signatures for equivalent
security. However, HSS-LMS provides performance advantages and HSS-LMS
is considered simpler (see Section 10 of {{RFC8554}}).

Firmware images can be signed using one of these post-quantum
algorithms before being distributed to
HSMs. {{?I-D.wiggers-hbs-state}} discusses various strategies for a
correct state and backup management for stateful hash-based
signatures.

Firmware images often have a long lifetime, requiring cryptographic
algorithms that provide strong security assurances over extended
periods. ML-DSA is not included in this list because it is a
lattice-based signature scheme, making it susceptible to potential
advances in quantum and classical attacks on structured lattices. The
long-term security of ML-DSA depends on the continued hardness of
lattice-based problems, which remain an active area of research. In
contrast, SLH-DSA, HSS-LMS, and XMSS are based on well-studied hash
functions, ensuring their security does not rely on unproven
assumptions about lattice hardness. Given this uncertainty, use of a
hash-based signature such as SLH-DSA may be preferable to ML-DSA for
firmware authentication, where cryptographic stability over a long
lifetime is a critical requirement.

# Security Considerations

The security considerations for key management in HSMs for PQC focus
on the secure storage and handling of cryptographic seeds, which are
used to derive private keys. Seeds must be protected with the same
security measures as private keys, and key derivation should be
efficient and secure within resource-constrained HSMs. Secure export
and backup mechanisms for seeds are essential to ensure recovery in
case of hardware failure, but these processes must be encrypted and
protected from unauthorized access.

## Side Channel Protection

Side-channel attacks exploit physical leaks during cryptographic
operations, such as timing information, power consumption,
electromagnetic emissions, or other physical characteristics, to
extract sensitive data like private keys or seeds. Given the
sensitivity of the seed and private key in PQC key generation, it is
critical to consider side-channel protection in HSM design. While
side-channel attacks remain an active research topic, their
significance in secure hardware design cannot be understated. HSMs
must incorporate strong countermeasures against side-channel
vulnerabilities to prevent attackers from gaining insights into secret
data during cryptographic operations.

# Acknowledgements
{:numbered="false"}

Thanks to Jean-Pierre Fiset, Richard Kettlewell, Mike Ounsworth, and
Aritra Banerjee for the detailed review.
